[quant][pt2e] Add documentation for pt2 export static quant (#2504)
pytorch/tutorials: prototype_source/pt2e_quant_ptq_static.rst

tldr; The PyTorch 2.0 Export Quantization API looks like the following:

.. code:: python

  import torch
  class M(torch.nn.Module):
     def __init__(self):
        super().__init__()
        self.linear = torch.nn.Linear(5, 10)

     def forward(self, x):
        return self.linear(x)

  example_inputs = (torch.randn(1, 5),)
  m = M().eval()

  # Step 1. program capture
  m = torch._dynamo.export(m, *example_inputs, aten_graph=True)
  # we get a model with aten ops

  # Step 2. quantization
  from torch.ao.quantization.quantize_pt2e import (
    prepare_pt2e,
    convert_pt2e,
  )

  from torch.ao.quantization.qnnpack_quantizer import (
    QNNPackQuantizer,
    get_symmetric_quantization_config,
  )
  # backend developer will write their own Quantizer and expose methods to allow users to express how they
  # want the model to be quantized
  quantizer = QNNPackQuantizer().set_global(get_symmetric_quantization_config())
  m = prepare_pt2e(m, quantizer)

  # calibration omitted

  m = convert_pt2e(m)
  # we have a model with aten ops doing integer computations when possible

> 1. Motivation of PyTorch 2.0 Export Quantization

Reviewer: I suggest to rework this section and make it more to the point of limitations in comparison to the new approach. We don't need to go to the details of which teams need to be involved to develop support, etc. and what can be improved. We should just say: our previous approach while works has the following limitations and the the list. I tried to do this below.

> 1. Motivation of PyTorch 2.0 Export Quantization

Author: "PyTorch 2.0 Export Quantization" is the name for the new flow, so I'll need to keep it

------------------------------------------------

Previously in FX Graph Mode Quantization we were using QConfigMapping and BackendConfig for customizations. QConfigMapping allows modeling users to specify how they want their model to be quantized, BackendConfig allows backend developers to specify the supported ways of quantization in their backend. Current API covers most use cases relatively well, but the main problem is it is not fully extensible without the involvement of the AO team. There are two main limitations for current API:

(1). Limitation around expressing quantization intentions for complicated operator patterns (how an operator pattern should be observed/quantized) using existing objects: QConfig and QConfigMapping.

> (2). It also has limited support on how user can express their intention of how they want their model to be quantized (here are all the possible ways user can express their intention of how to quantize a model right now: QConfigMapping — PyTorch master documentation ), for example, if user wants to quantize the every other linear in the model, or the quantization behavior has some dependency on the actual shape of the Tensor (e.g. only observe/quantize inputs and outputs when the linear has a 3d input), AO team need to work with backend developers and modeling users to add the support.

Author: `extra multi-department work needs to be initiated` I'll reword this a bit

> Also there are a few things that can be improved on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few improvement could make the existing approach better:
```

> (3). Currently we use QConfigMapping and BackendConfig as separate objects, QConfigMapping describes user’s intention of how they want their model to be quantized, BackendConfig describes what kind of quantization a backend support, currently BackendConfig is backend specific, but QConfigMapping is not, and user can provide a QConfigMapping that is incompatible with a specific BackendConfig, this is not a great UX. Ideally we can structure this better by making both configuration (QConfigMapping) and quantization capability (BackendConfig) backend specific, so there will be less confusion about incompatibilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `QConfigMapping`` and ``BackendConfig`` as separate objects.``QConfigMapping`` describes user’s intention of how they want their model to be quantized, ``BackendConfig`` describes what kind of quantization a backend supports. While ``BackendConfig`` is backend-specific, ``QConfigMapping`` is not, and the user can accidentally provide a ``QConfigMapping`` that is incompatible with a specific ``BackendConfig``. 
```

> (4). Currently in QConfig we are exposing observer/fake_quant observer classes as an object for user to configure quantization, this increases the things that user may need to care about, e.g. not only the dtype but also how the observation should happen, these could potentially be hidden from user so that the user interface is simpler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In ``QConfigMapping``, we are exposing observer and ``fake_quant`` observer classes as objects for user to configure quantization. This complicates code development for PyTorch users.
```

Reviewer: The original sentence is confusing - suggesting to simplify.

> Here is a summary of benefits with the quantizer API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a summary of the benefits of using the new Quantizer API:

```

> - Programmability (Addressing (1) and (2)): When a user’s quantization needs are not covered by available quantizers, users can build their own quantizer and compose it with other quantizers as mentioned earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Programmability (Addressing 1. and 2.: When a user’s quantization needs are not covered by available quantizers, users can build their own quantizer and compose it with other quantizers as mentioned above.
```

> - Simplified UX (Addressing (3)): Provides a single instance with which both backend and users interact. Thus you no longer have 1) user facing quantization config mapping to map users intent and 2) a separate quantization config that backends interact with to configure what backend support. We will still have a method for users to query what is supported in a quantizer. With a single instance, composing different quantization capabilities also becomes more natural than previously. For example QNNPACK does not support embedding_byte and we have native support for this in ExecuTorch. Thus if we had ExecuTorchQuantizer that only quantized embedding_byte, then it can be composed with QNNPACKQuantizer. (Previously this will be concatenating the two BackendConfig together and since options in QConfigMappings are not backend specific, user also need to figure out how to specify the configurations by themselves that matches the quantization capabilities of the combined backend. with a single quantizer instance, we can compose two quantizers and query the composed quantizer for capabilities, which makes it less error prone and cleaner, e.g. composed_quantizer.quantization_capabilities())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Simplified and improved User Experience (UX) (addressing 3.): Provides a single instance with which both backend and users interact. Thus, you no longer have 1) user-facing quantization config mapping to map user's intent and 2) a separate quantization config that backends interact with to configure which backend to support. We will still have a method for users to query what is supported in a quantizer. With a single instance, composing different quantization capabilities also becomes more natural than previously. For example, QNNPACK does not support ``embedding_byte`` and we have native support for this in ExecuTorch. Thus, if we had ``ExecuTorchQuantizer`` that only quantized ``embedding_byte``, then it can be composed with ``QNNPACKQuantizer``. (Previously this will be concatenating the two ``BackendConfig`` together and since options in ``QConfigMappings`` are not backend specific, user also need to figure out how to specify the configurations by themselves that matches the quantization capabilities of the combined backend. With a single quantizer instance, we can compose two quantizers and query the composed quantizer for capabilities, which makes it less error prone and cleaner, such as ``composed_quantizer.quantization_capabilities())``.
```

> - Separation of Concerns (Addressing (4)): As we design the quantizer API, we also decouples specification of quantization, as expressed in terms of dtype, min/max (# of bits), symmetric etc., from the observer concept. Currently the observer captures both quantization specification and how to observe (Histogram vs MinMax observer). Modeling users are freed from interacting with observer/fake quant objects with this change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Separation of Concerns (addressing 4.): As we design the quantizer API, we also decouple specification of quantization, as expressed in terms of ``dtype``, min and max (# of bits), symmetric, and so on, from the observer concept. Currently, the observer captures both quantization specification and how to observe (Histogram vs MinMax observer). Modeling users are freed from interacting with observer and ``fake_quant`` objects with this change.
```

2. Define Helper Functions and Prepare Dataset
----------------------------------------------

We’ll start by doing the necessary imports, defining some helper functions and prepare the data.
These steps are identitcal to `Static Quantization with Eager Mode in PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/advanced/static_quantization_tutorial.html>`_.

> To run the code in this tutorial using the entire ImageNet dataset, first download imagenet by following the instructions at here `ImageNet Data <http://www.image-net.org/download>`_. Unzip the downloaded file into the 'data_path' folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the code in this tutorial using the entire ImageNet dataset, first download ImageNet by following the instructions at here `ImageNet Data <http://www.image-net.org/download>`_. Unzip the downloaded file into the ``data_path`` folder.
```

                normalize,
            ]))

        train_sampler = torch.utils.data.RandomSampler(dataset)
        test_sampler = torch.utils.data.SequentialSampler(dataset_test)

        data_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
            dataset, batch_size=train_batch_size,
            sampler=train_sampler)

        data_loader_test = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
            dataset_test, batch_size=eval_batch_size,
            sampler=test_sampler)

        return data_loader, data_loader_test

    data_path = '~/.data/imagenet'
    saved_model_dir = 'data/'
    float_model_file = 'resnet18_pretrained_float.pth'

    train_batch_size = 30
    eval_batch_size = 50

    data_loader, data_loader_test = prepare_data_loaders(data_path)
    example_inputs = (next(iter(data_loader))[0])
    criterion = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
    float_model = load_model(saved_model_dir + float_model_file).to("cpu")
    float_model.eval()

    # create another instance of the model since
    # we need to keep the original model around
    model_to_quantize = load_model(saved_model_dir + float_model_file).to("cpu")

3. Set model to eval mode
-------------------------

> For post training quantization, we'll need to set model to eval mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For post training quantization, we'll need to set model to the eval mode.
```

.. code:: python

    model_to_quantize.eval()

4. Import the Backend Specific Quantizer and Configure how to Quantize the Model
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. code:: python

  from torch.ao.quantization.xnnpack_quantizer import (
    XNNPackQuantizer,
    get_symmetric_quantization_config,
  )
  quantizer = XNNPackQuantizer()
  quantizer.set_globa(get_symmetric_quantization_config())

`Quantizer` is backend specific, and each `Quantizer` will provide their own way to allow users to configure their model. Just as an example, here is the different configuration APIs supported by XNNPackQuantizer:

.. code:: python
  quantizer.set_global(qconfig_opt)  # qconfig_opt is an optional qconfig, either a valid qconfig or None
      .set_object_type(torch.nn.Conv2d, qconfig_opt) # can be a module type
      .set_object_type(torch.nn.functional.linear, qconfig_opt) # or torch functional op      
      .set_module_name("foo.bar", qconfig_opt)

5. Prepare the Model for Post Training Static Quantization
----------------------------------------------------------

> `prepare_pt2e` folds BatchNorm modules into previous Conv2d modules, and insert observers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``prepare_pt2e`` folds ``BatchNorm`` modules into previous ``Conv2d`` modules, and insert observers
```

in appropriate places in the model.

.. code:: python

    prepared_model = prepare_pt2e(model_to_quantize, quantizer)
    print(prepared_model.graph)

6. Calibration
--------------

> Calibration function is run after the observers are inserted in the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The calibration function is run after the observers are inserted in the model.
```

The purpose for calibration is to run through some sample examples that is representative of the workload
(for example a sample of the training data set) so that the observers in the model are able to observe
the statistics of the Tensors and we can later use this information to calculate quantization parameters.

.. code:: python

    def calibrate(model, data_loader):
        model.eval()
        with torch.no_grad():
            for image, target in data_loader:
                model(image)
    calibrate(prepared_model, data_loader_test)  # run calibration on sample data

7. Convert the Model to a Quantized Model
-----------------------------------------
``convert_pt2e`` takes a calibrated model and produces a quantized model.

.. code:: python

    quantized_model = convert_pt2e(prepared_model)
    print(quantized_model)

> Note: the model produced here also had some improvement upon the previous `representations <https://github.com/pytorch/rfcs/blob/master/RFC-0019-Extending-PyTorch-Quantization-to-Custom-Backends.md>` in fx graph mode quantizaiton, previously all quantized operators are represented as `dequantize -> fp32_op -> qauntize`, in the new flow, we choose to represent some of the operators with integer computation so that it's closer to the computation happens in hardwares. For more details, please see: `Quantized Model Representation <https://docs.google.com/document/d/17h-OEtD4o_hoVuPqUFsdm5uo7psiNMY8ThN03F9ZZwg/edit>` (TODO: make this an API doc/issue).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::  The model produced here also had some improvement upon the previous `representations <https://github.com/pytorch/rfcs/blob/master/RFC-0019-Extending-PyTorch-Quantization-to-Custom-Backends.md>`_ in the FX graph mode quantization, previously all quantized operators are represented as ``dequantize -> fp32_op -> qauntize``, in the new flow, we choose to represent some of the operators with integer computation so that it's closer to the computation happens in hardwares. For more details, please see: `Quantized Model Representation <https://docs.google.com/document/d/17h-OEtD4o_hoVuPqUFsdm5uo7psiNMY8ThN03F9ZZwg/edit>`_.
```

    # this does not run due to some erros loading convrelu module:
    # ModuleAttributeError: 'ConvReLU2d' object has no attribute '_modules'
    # save the whole model directly
    # torch.save(quantized_model, pt2e_graph_mode_model_file_path)
    # loaded_quantized_model = torch.load(pt2e_graph_mode_model_file_path)

    # save with state_dict
    # torch.save(quantized_model.state_dict(), pt2e_graph_mode_model_file_path)
    # import copy
    # model_to_quantize = copy.deepcopy(float_model)
    # prepared_model = prepare_pt2e(model_to_quantize, {"": qconfig})
    # loaded_quantized_model = convert_pt2e(prepared_model)
    # loaded_quantized_model.load_state_dict(torch.load(pt2e_graph_mode_model_file_path))

    # save with script
    torch.jit.save(torch.jit.script(quantized_model), pt2e_graph_mode_model_file_path)
    loaded_quantized_model = torch.jit.load(pt2e_graph_mode_model_file_path)

    top1, top5 = evaluate(loaded_quantized_model, criterion, data_loader_test)
    print("[after serialization/deserialization] Evaluation accuracy on test dataset: %2.2f, %2.2f"%(top1.avg, top5.avg))

> If you want to get better accuracy or performance,  try configure `quantizer` in different ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to get better accuracy or performance,  try configuring the ``quantizer`` in different ways.
```

9. Debugging Quantized Model
----------------------------

> We have Numeric Suite that can help with debugging in eager mode and fx graph mode, the new version of Numeric Suite working with PyTorch 2.0 Export models is still in development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have Numeric Suite that can help with debugging in eager mode and the FX graph mode. The new version of Numeric Suite working with PyTorch 2.0 Export models is still in development.
```

Reviewer: Can you add a link to Numeric Suite

quantized in eager mode. PT2 Export quantization and eager mode quantization produce very similar quantized models,
so the expectation is that the accuracy and speedup are similar as well.

.. code:: python

    print("Size of PT2 Export quantized model")
    print_size_of_model(quantized_model)
    top1, top5 = evaluate(quantized_model, criterion, data_loader_test)
    print("PT2 Export quantized model Evaluation accuracy on test dataset: %2.2f, %2.2f"%(top1.avg, top5.avg))

    from torchvision.models.quantization.resnet import resnet18
    eager_quantized_model = resnet18(pretrained=True, quantize=True).eval()
    print("Size of eager mode quantized model")
    eager_quantized_model = torch.jit.script(eager_quantized_model)
    print_size_of_model(eager_quantized_model)
    top1, top5 = evaluate(eager_quantized_model, criterion, data_loader_test)
    print("eager mode quantized model Evaluation accuracy on test dataset: %2.2f, %2.2f"%(top1.avg, top5.avg))
    eager_mode_model_file = "resnet18_eager_mode_quantized.pth"
    torch.jit.save(eager_quantized_model, saved_model_dir + eager_mode_model_file)

> We can see that the model size and accuracy of  graph mode and eager mode quantized model are pretty similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that the model size and accuracy of the graph mode and eager mode quantized model are pretty similar.
```

Running the model in AIBench (with single threading) gives the following result:

> (TODO): update numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: If you want to keep the todo, add as a comment so it's not visible in the final HTML: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#comments

(prototype) PyTorch 2.0 Export Post Training Static Quantization
================================================================
**Author**: `Jerry Zhang <https://github.com/jerryzh168>`_

This tutorial introduces the steps to do post training static quantization in graph mode based on

> `torch._export.export <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/export.html>`_. Compared to `FX Graph Mode Quantization <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/fx_graph_mode_ptq_static.html>`, this flow is expected to have significantly higher model coverage (`88% on 14K models <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/93667#issuecomment-1601171596>`), better programmability, and a simplified UX.

Author: @svekars looks like you are making some final updates, could you add `_` to "`FX Graph Mode Quantization <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/fx_graph_mode_ptq_static.html>`" as well?

> `torch._export.export <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/export.html>`_. Compared to `FX Graph Mode Quantization <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/fx_graph_mode_ptq_static.html>`, this flow is expected to have significantly higher model coverage (`88% on 14K models <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/93667#issuecomment-1601171596>`), better programmability, and a simplified UX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`torch._export.export <https://pytorch.org/docs/main/export.html>`_. Compared to `FX Graph Mode Quantization <https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/fx_graph_mode_ptq_static.html>`_, this flow is expected to have significantly higher model coverage (`88% on 14K models <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/93667#issuecomment-1601171596>`_), better programmability, and a simplified UX.
```

A few improvements could make the existing flow better:
3. We use ``QConfigMapping`` and ``BackendConfig`` as separate objects, ``QConfigMapping`` describes user’s intention of how they want their model to be quantized, ``BackendConfig`` describes what kind of quantization a backend support. ``BackendConfig`` is backend specific, but ``QConfigMapping`` is not, and user can provide a ``QConfigMapping`` that is incompatible with a specific ``BackendConfig``, this is not a great UX. Ideally we can structure this better by making both configuration (``QConfigMapping``) and quantization capability (``BackendConfig``) backend specific, so there will be less confusion about incompatibilities.

4. In ``QConfig`` we are exposing observer/fake_quant observer classes as an object for user to configure quantization, this increases the things that user may need to care about, e.g. not only the dtype but also how the observation should happen, these could potentially be hidden from user so that the user interface is simpler.

> Here is a summary of the benefits of the new API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a summary of the benefits of the new API:

```

- Programmability (addressing 1. and 2.): When a user’s quantization needs are not covered by available quantizers, users can build their own quantizer and compose it with other quantizers as mentioned above.

> - Simplified UX (addressing 3.): Provides a single instance with which both backend and users interact. Thus you no longer have 1) user facing quantization config mapping to map users intent and 2) a separate quantization config that backends interact with to configure what backend support. We will still have a method for users to query what is supported in a quantizer. With a single instance, composing different quantization capabilities also becomes more natural than previously. For example XNNPACK does not support embedding_byte and we have native support for this in ExecuTorch. Thus if we had ExecuTorchQuantizer that only quantized embedding_byte, then it can be composed with XNNPACKQuantizer. (Previously this will be concatenating the two ``BackendConfig`` together and since options in ``QConfigMapping``s are not backend specific, user also need to figure out how to specify the configurations by themselves that matches the quantization capabilities of the combined backend. with a single quantizer instance, we can compose two quantizers and query the composed quantizer for capabilities, which makes it less error prone and cleaner, e.g. composed_quantizer.quantization_capabilities())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Simplified UX (addressing 3.): Provides a single instance with which both backend and users interact. Thus you no longer have 1) user facing quantization config mapping to map users intent and 2) a separate quantization config that backends interact with to configure what backend support. We will still have a method for users to query what is supported in a quantizer. With a single instance, composing different quantization capabilities also becomes more natural than previously. For example XNNPACK does not support embedding_byte and we have native support for this in ExecuTorch. Thus if we had ExecuTorchQuantizer that only quantized embedding_byte, then it can be composed with XNNPACKQuantizer. (Previously this will be concatenating the two ``BackendConfig`` together and since options in ``QConfigMapping`` are not backend specific, user also need to figure out how to specify the configurations by themselves that matches the quantization capabilities of the combined backend. with a single quantizer instance, we can compose two quantizers and query the composed quantizer for capabilities, which makes it less error prone and cleaner, e.g. composed_quantizer.quantization_capabilities())
```

the statistics of the Tensors and we can later use this information to calculate quantization parameters.

.. code:: python

    def calibrate(model, data_loader):
        model.eval()
        with torch.no_grad():
            for image, target in data_loader:
                model(image)
    calibrate(prepared_model, data_loader_test)  # run calibration on sample data

8. Convert the Calibrated Model to a Quantized Model
----------------------------------------------------
``convert_pt2e`` takes a calibrated model and produces a quantized model.

.. code:: python

    quantized_model = convert_pt2e(prepared_model)
    print(quantized_model)

.. note::
   the model produced here also had some improvement upon the previous `representations <https://github.com/pytorch/rfcs/blob/master/RFC-0019-Extending-PyTorch-Quantization-to-Custom-Backends.md>`_ in the FX graph mode quantizaiton, previously all quantized operators are represented as ``dequantize -> fp32_op -> qauntize``, in the new flow, we choose to represent some of the operators with integer computation so that it's closer to the computation happens in hardwares.

>    For example, here is how we plan to represent a quantized linear operator:
>    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, here is how we plan to represent a quantized linear operator:
   
   ```
```

>    For example, here is how we plan to represent a quantized linear operator:
>    ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, here is how we plan to represent a quantized linear operator:
   
   ```
```
